Title: We bought a satnav
Subtitle: Which doesn't have a network card
Date: 2015-02-18
Background: img/driving.jpg

Last month we bought a Tom Tom satellite navigation device.

I ditched my old Tom Tom years ago and vowed never to buy anything from
them again, mostly because of a disagreement over a Â£100 charge for a
digital map they refused to refund but could never distribute to me
because of their broken software. We tried a Garmin but it was
frustratingly unintuitive and was quickly dispatched to a land-fill
site.

Since then I've been coping with Google's Navigation app on my Android
phone. The app has got slower and slower at an exponential rate, I think
halving its performance, while doubling its battery consumption, every
18 months, in a kind of perverse inverse of Moore's Law. Lately the app
was consuming more power than it was taking in over the USB charger, not
great if your phone is running low on battery anyway, which seems to be
almost always on a relatively old smartphone.

But by far the worst part is the expectation Google (and everyone else
has) that you're always on-line, always on, always part of the grid. And
in the English countryside, where I live, that means a very poor, slow
unresponsive, unreliable computing experience (reminiscent of waiting
for web pages to load in the age of dialup).

So eventually a tipping point was reached: the frustration with Google
became greater than the conviction never to further enrich the company
behind TomTom.

![TomTom GO 50](img/tomtom.jpg)

Actually, the device we got (TomTom GO 50) is far better than the
previous thing, and the overall experience far exceeds anything on a
phone.

That got me thinking, trying to understand why I was so happy with the
purchase. I think the experience showed me how far along the wrong path
the tech industry has been travelling.

My prediction is that, over the next 25 years, society will change
course from a frantic march towards a purely online model advocated by
some back back to a _hybrid offline/online model_, one where much of your
data is stored and managed locally and the network used more sparingly,
where appropriate.

There are multiple reasons for this :-

 - Advances in networking will never exceed the continued advances in
 storage.
 - Existing network providers inability to innovate and radically
   improve coverage and speeds.
 - Awareness of surveillance levels will drive some motivated individuals to develop alternatives to the all-online model promoted by cloud vendors.
 - A growing appreciation of the downsides of continual interruption and the negative effects it has on creative work.

Of course, this debate about the pros and cons of 'local versus remote'
computing is as old as computing itself. The point is to strike the right balance.
